# DataVizWork
## Code and final project RMD for data visualization class (DSA5200-Merrimack College).

The following visualization project utilizes data obtained from the American Community Survey 2010-2012 Public Use Microdata Series. This dataset provides information on the starting salaries, unemployment rate and underemployment rates for recent college graduates from 2010-2012. The dataset includes interesting information regarding the influence of college major choice on earnings potential, broken down by gender participation. It is important to note that the starting salaries reported were highly influenced by the economic climate at the time. Unemployment rates per college major and gender were acquired via random sampling of larger groups and thus may be subject to error. Underemployment rates per major category were calculated as the quotient of those employed in jobs requiring a degree over the sum of those in low-wage jobs and jobs not requiring a degree. The dataset had one NA that was removed for the visualization with no obvious outliers

The analysis indicated that generally the most popular college majors are the most lucrative. For instance, popular majors such as Engineering and Business tended to afford the highest starting salaries. However, when broken down by gender participation this relationship falls noticeably short. College majors that are dominated by female participation (Humanites and Liberal Arts) tended to be the least lucrative. This beckons the potentially controversial question: are females purposefully self-selecting fields that inherently lower in pay or does society inherently undervalue the work product of female-dominated professions?

The visualizations explored the potential earnings power for those graduating with STEM (Science Technology, Engineering and Math) degrees. Not surprisingly, those graduating with these degrees tended to have higher starting salaries. Interestingly, the gender bias of starting salary was also highly evident for STEM degree recipients. The most lucrative STEM degree, Engineering, was male dominated, while the least lucrative STEM degrees, Health/Biology, were female dominated. The accepted reasoning for this is the concept of valuative bias, where society unfairly characterizes female-dominated professions as less valuable.
